---
title: "Open Research Computing in Python"
author: Jarrod Millman
date: 2010-06-25
slug: orcp2010
url: orcp2010.html
---

A one-day workshop on held at the [Mathematical Sciences Research
Institute (MSRI)](http://www.msri.org) in on June 25, 2010 in Berkeley,
CA.

- 09:00-09:10 Welcome Jarrod Millman and William Stein
- 09:10-10:10 What to demand from a Scientific Computing Language --
  Even if you don't care about computing or languages - Peter Norvig (Google)
- 10:10-11:00 Cython: the best of both worlds - Robert Bradshaw (Google)
- 11:00-11:50 Python: an ecosystem for scientific computing - Fernando Perez (UC Berkeley)
- 12:00-14:00 LUNCH
- 14:00-14:50 Python in science and engineering education in India - Prabhu Ramachandran (IIT Bombay)
- 14:50-15:40 Sage: creating a viable open source alternative to Magma, Maple, Mathematica, and Matlab - William Stein (University of Washington)
- 15:40-16:10 BREAK
- 16:10-17:00 The foundation for mathematical and scientific computing - Jarrod Millman (UC Berkeley)
- 17:00-18:00 DISCUSSION

The workshop will be held in Simon's auditorium at MSRI:

    Simon's auditorium
    Mathematical Science Research Institute
    17 Gauss Way
    Berkeley, CA 94720

# Abstracts

**Cython: the best of both worlds**

Robert Bradshaw

Cython is an extension to the Python language that allows explicit type
declarations and is compiled directly to C. This addresses Python's
large overhead for numerical loops and the difficulty of efficiently
making use of existing C and Fortran code, which Cython code can
interact with natively. The Cython language combines the speed of C with
the power and simplicity of the Python language.

**Python: an ecosystem for scientific computing**

Fernando Perez

As the relationship between research and computing evolves, new tools
are required that can not only treat numerical problems, but also allow
us to solve a variety of problems involving large datasets in many
formats, new algorithms and computational systems like databases or
internet servers.

I will discuss how Python provides a balance of clarity and flexibility,
without sacrificing avenues for performance, to develop better
computational research tools.

**Python in science and engineering education in India**

Prabhu Ramachandran

The National Mission on Education through ICT (NMEICT) is a one billion
dollar initiative launched by the Ministry of Human Resources
Development (MHRD), Government of India. It's goal is to improve the
quality of tertiary education in India. One component of the mission
involves the spread of open source tools in collegiate education.

In May 2009, IIT Bombay proposed a project on Free Open source Software
for Science and Engineering Education (FOSSEE) as part of this mission.
The project is to run for three years. One of the thrust areas of FOSSEE
is the propagation of the use of Python in science and engineering
curricula. To this end, we have been conducting numerous workshops on
Python for scientific computing, generating documentation, hosting
conferences etc. The workshops are targeted at faculties of colleges,
research scholars and students. In this talk, we discuss what we have
achieved until now and highlight our future plans for the project. We
also attempt to highlight what this will do for the Python community at
large.

**Sage: creating a viable open source alternative to Magma, Maple,
Mathematica, and Matlab**

William Stein

Sage is an open source mathematical software project that I started in
2005, which has had over 200 contributors, about 50 active developers,
and receives funding from NSF, Google, Microsoft, and other
organizations. The goal of the Sage project is to create a viable free
open source alternative to Magma, Maple, Mathematica and MATLAB. I will
describe why I started the Sage project, then give a status report about
what Sage currently is. This paper is closely related to my
[talk](http://wstein.org/papers/icms/icms_2010.pdf).

**The foundation for mathematical and scientific computing**

Jarrod Millman

William Stein, Fernando Perez, and I are founding a non-profit
foundation for mathematical and scientific research computing. Our
purpose is to ensure unrestricted access to the best computational tools
for research and education in mathematics, science, and engineering. Our
aim is to do this primarily by fostering existing efforts and
communities. The foundation will initially focus on Python, rather than
other languages for scientific computing such as R or Scilab. Despite
this initial focus on Python, the foundation's mission will not be
merely to promote the use of Python in science.

As research grows increasingly dependent on computing, it becomes
critical for our computational resources to be developed with the same
rigor, open review and access as the results they support. For this
reason, we will actively promote:

- sharing of scientific software, data and knowledge necessary for
  reproducible research
- unrestricted access to research outcomes and educational tools
- open source software developed by collaborative, meritocratic
  communities
- academic recognition of computational developments on equal footing
  to the publication of results
- openly tested, validated and documented software as the basis for
  reliable scientific outcomes
- high standards of computational literacy in the education of
  mathematicians, scientists and engineers
