---
title: "Verifiable, reproducible research and computational science"
author: Jarrod Millman
date: 2011-03-04
slug: siam2011
url: siam2011.html
---


A mini-symposium at the [SIAM Conference on Computational Science &
Engineering](http://www.siam.org/meetings/cse11) in Reno, NV on March 4,
2011.

Summary
-------

As research grows increasingly dependent on computing, it becomes
critical for our computational resources to be developed with the same
rigor, open review and access as the results they support. In this
minisymposium, we will discuss:

-   sharing of scientific software, data and knowledge necessary for
    reproducible research
-   unrestricted access to research outcomes and educational tools
-   open source software developed by collaborative, meritocratic
    communities
-   openly tested, validated and documented software as the basis for
    reliable scientific outcomes
-   high standards of computational literacy in the education of
    mathematicians, scientists and engineers

MS148 - Part I of II
--------------------

**The Challenge of Reproducible Research in the Computer Age**
([slides](/talks/siam2011/ms148/millman.pdf))

[K. Jarrod Millman](http://jarrodmillman.com), University of
California, Berkeley, USA

Computing is increasingly central to the practice of mathematical and
scientific research. This has provided many new opportunities as well as
new challenges. In particular, modern scientific computing has strained
the ability of researchers to reproduce their own (as well as their
colleagues') work. In this talk, I will outline some of the obstacles to
reproducible research as well as some potential solutions and
opportunities.

**Reproducible Research, Lessons from the Madagascar Project**
([slides](/talks/siam2011/ms148/fomel.pdf))

[Sergey Fomel](http://sepwww.stanford.edu/oldsep/sergey/), University of
Texas at Austin, USA

The Madagascar open-source project is a community effort, which
implements reproducible research practices, as envisioned by Jon
Claerbout. More than 100 geophysical papers have been published,
together with open software code and data, and are maintained by the
community. We have learned that continuous maintenance and repeated
testing are necessary for enabling long-term reproducibility. As noted
by Claerbout and others, the main beneficiary of the reproducible
research discipline is the author.

**Top 10 Reasons to NOT Share your Code and Why you Should Anyway**
([slides](/talks/siam2011/ms148/leveque.pdf))

[Randall J. LeVeque](http://www.amath.washington.edu/~rjl/), University
of Washington, USA

The research codes used to produce results (tables, plots, etc.) in
publications are rarely made available, limiting the readers' ability to
understand the algorithms that are actually implemented. Many objections
are typically raised to doing so. Although there are some valid
concerns, my view is that there are good counter-arguments or ways to
address most of these issues. In this talk I will discuss what may be
the top 10 reasons.

**Intellectual Contributions to Digitized Science: Implementing the
Scientific Method**
([slides](/talks/siam2011/ms148/stodden.pdf))

[Victoria Stodden](http://www.stanford.edu/~vcs/), Columbia University,
USA

Our stock of scientific knowledge is now accumulating in digital form,
and the underlying reasoning is often in the code that generated the
findings, which is often never published. The case for open data is
being made but open code must be recognized as equally important in a
principled approach, that of reproducibility of computational results.
Issues involved with code and data disclosure are presented, along with
possible solutions.

MS155 - Part II of II
=====================

**Reproducible Research: Lessons from the Open Source World**
([slides](/talks/siam2011/ms155/perez.pdf))

[Fernando Pérez](http://fperez.org/), University of California,
Berkeley, USA

Why are the practices of open source software development often more
consistent with our ideas of openness and reproducibility in science
than science itself? Today's scientific praxis falls short of our ideals
of reproducibility, and these problems are particularly acute in
computational domains where they should be less prevalent. I will
explore the reasons for this and will draw some ideas from software
development that provide technical means to address some of these
issues.

**FEMhub, a Free Distribution of Open Source Finite Element Codes**
([slides](/talks/siam2011/ms155/solin.pdf))

[Pavel Solin](http://hpfem.org/~pavel/), Ondrej Certik, Aayush Poudel,
and Sameer Regmi, University of Nevada, Reno, USA; Mateusz Paprock,
Technical University of Wroclaw, Poland

[FEMhub](http://femhub.org) is an open source distribution of finite
element codes with a unified Python interface. The goal of the project
is to reduce heterogeneity in installation and usage of open source
finite element codes, facilitate their interoperability and comparisons,
and improve reproducibility of results. FEMhub is available for download
as desktop application, but all codes are also automatically available
in the [Online Numerical Methods Laboratory](http://lab.femhub.org).

**Reproducible Models and Reliable Simulations: Current Trends in
Computational Neuroscience**
([slides](/talks/siam2011/ms155/plesser.pdf))

[Hans E. Plesser](http://arken.umb.no/~plesser/), Norwegian University
of Life Sciences, Norway; Sharon M. Crook, Arizona State University,
USA; Andrew P. Davison, CNRS, France

Computational neuroscientists simulate models of neuronal networks to
further our understanding of brain dynamics. Unfortunately, the validity
of models of neuronal dynamics and of the simulation software
implementing the models is difficult to ascertain, challenging the
validity of computational neuroscience. I will describe how the
computational neuroscience community is addressing validity through
software reviews, best practices, increasing use of established software
packages, meta-simulators, systematic testing, and simulator-independent
model-specification languages.

**Publishing Reproducible Results with VisTrails**
([slides](/talks/siam2011/ms155/silva.pdf))

Juliana Freire and [Claudio Silva](http://www.cs.utah.edu/~csilva/),
University of Utah, USA

VisTrails is an open-source provenance management and scientific
workflow system designed to support scientific discovery. It combines
and substantially extends useful features of visualization and
scientific workflow systems. Similar to visualization systems, VisTrails
makes advanced scientific visualization techniques available to users
allowing them to explore and compare different visual representations of
their data; and similar to scientific workflow systems, VisTrails
enables the composition of workflows that combine specialized libraries,
distributed computing infrastructure, and Web services.
