---
title: "Teaching computational thinking and practice"
author: Jarrod Millman
date: 2015-03-30
slug: siam2015
url: siam2015.html
---

A minisymposium held during the [SIAM Conference on Computational Science &
Engineering](http://www.siam.org/meetings/cse15) in Salt Lake City, UT on
Sunday, March 15, 2015.

## [MS78](http://meetings.siam.org/sess/dsp_programsess.cfm?SESSIONCODE=20332)

### Summary

As dependence on computational tools increases, so does the need for better
computational training.
We discuss our own efforts to provide such training.
We address several larger questions including:
What is the role of computational training in our various fields?
How can we scale training to meet demand?
What technologies, languages, principles, and practices should we teach?
What is the right balance between conceptual learning and hands-on training and practice?
More generally, how should we train the next generation of
scientists, statisticians, and engineers in computational methods and
practices?

### Teaching statistical computing to undergraduates ([slides](/talks/siam2015/ms78/cse-mar152015-millman.pdf))

<div class="highlight"><pre>
K. Jarrod Millman (co-organizer)
Division of Biostatistics, UC Berkeley

Philip B. Stark (co-organizer)
Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley

</pre></div>

We frame the minisymposium in the context of our
experience teaching computing with data to undergraduates.
We discuss our recent efforts to automate grading student computational
work in Python and R.
Automating grading can improve pedagogy by
making it easier to assign students more work,
reducing latency in providing feedback,
and enabling TAs to spend more time working directly with students
by freeing them from the "busy work" of grading.

### Teaching with Version Control ([slides](/talks/siam2015/ms78/cse-mar152015-leveque.pdf))

<div class="highlight"><pre>
Randall J. LeVeque
Applied Mathematics Department
University of Washington
</pre></div>

The use of version control is widely viewed as a best practice in
the development of software, not only for large scale projects with
many collaborators but also for the solo development of research
codes. However, students are rarely taught to use version control
in courses. I will describe some recent attempts to introduce it
into the computational curriculum by requiring students to access
course materials, submit homework, and collaborate on group projects
via GitHub or BitBucket repositories.

### Teaching Computing to Engineers ([slides](http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1363841))

<div class="highlight"><pre>
Lorena A. Barba
Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering,
The George Washington University
</pre></div>

The term "computational thinking" became quite popular some years ago with a
viewpoint piece at the CACM by Wang (2006), but the term goes back to Papert 10
years before. Wang explained it as the ability to think algorithmically and
apply problem-solving computation in other fields. We've been talking about
teaching computational thinking ever since. With an interest in reforming how
we teach computing to engineering students, I stumbled onto an extension of
this idea that defines the pedagogical value of computation. With modern tools
for interactive computing (e.g. IPython Notebooks), it becomes possible to
learn by computing, to actually create knowledge&mdash;similar to what we do in
scientific computing to make discoveries, but in education. I will describe how
this thinking has been inspiring several educational initiatives aiming at
making computing a core pedagogical instrument.

### Community discussion

- [Notes from community discussion](https://github.com/jarrodmillman/cse2015/wiki)
